Life in the Chip Lane



I love music. I really do. I love making it even more so. Finding the correct notes that are going on in my head, putting them down, arranging it all so it flows perfectly; it all gives me a an insane rush that can’t be matched. Lately, I have found that music isn’t always as easy as it was when I cared less about a musical piece and just threw a bunch of stuff together, or when I had more time to focus on it. Being part of the chip community (as with any music community I would guess) I am connected via social media to several groups and sites where my fellow music making entities can, and do, post all of their wonderful creations. People from around the world are constantly updating these sites with everything from demos to fully blown complete and wonderful albums. Daily. This is something that is constantly happening. So much so that it can be easy to get really bogged down in the sense that all of these people are constantly creative and here I am: barely getting plays on my bandcamp, working on music that seems to go nowhere, or even not working on it at all. Looking at these creative people that are so involved in music and working on it constantly makes me wonder if my dream of being a music composer is worth pursuing. If I have what it takes or not. I tend to write more music based on feeling rather than theory, and I think that is why I can get a little sad seeing people be so prolific while I am there not feeling any of the things that help me create.



Piecing the Music Bit by Bit

I know for a fact that if I were to sit down with an idea and work an hour a day on music that I could easily find myself with constant new music. I know this because that is how my latest album, [sleep], was written. I had the idea, an album based on one night of my own sleep cycle, and I started with a chord. As more and more of it came to be, more and more of it would blossom. Ideas built off of other ideas and it turned into a really cool little concept album. The thing that helped me there was structure and a theme. I would brainstorm about what happens in my normal night’s sleep (dreaming, waking up in the middle of the night, outside noises being heard) and I would then sit at a starbucks on the corner of 33rd st and 5th ave every weekday on my lunch hour and work on arranging. I would listen constantly to these tracks and take notes. I made a check list for the ideas I would have while listening and made sure I went and did them the next day. I had my idea, my check list, my pig snacks…what more could I want. (sorry for the SotD reference). Everything was wonderful and I had a fantastic time writing the album. Until it was over. Then I had no ideas. I had no notes. I had no pig snacks. I had finished it and it was being whored out for all of, well some of, the internet to see. At that time I didn’t care because I was happy to have new stuff to share with others, but eventually that happiness faded, as it tends to do and I was left with a blank slate. With that blank slate, I would get back online to see that no one had downloaded my album that day, and with a few more clicks find that Dj Cutman had just dropped his 4th album this year and that it was in the top of the bandcamp charts.

This got me to wonder: what is it that they have? How do get out there like that? How do I reach people when I can tell that they don’t even listen to 10% of my songs?  How do I write something else and become new again? All questions without finding answers. So I find myself giving up on music for a while. Straying from ucollective.org and the chiptunes = win facebook group, because I feel like I am not really one of them. Like I don’t belong because I can’t do what they do. This leads me to go outside, hang out with friends, spend time with a certain girl (who was the nurse in the dream sequence of the track 5AM off of [sleep]) and just generally experiencing life.



Life, Music, and Everything Else

That last bit, experiencing life, that is how I get my ideas. By going through my life and finding myself in new situations. Learning new things. This, in turn, brings me back to music thusly renewing the cycle of how I create. It wasn’t until I realized this fact that I started to not feel so bad about myself when Kubbi drops a new album or even when sleepytimejesse (the narrator in the previously mention dream sequence) gets featured on a bunch of huge websites for his latest wonderful creation. I don’t feel bad because, I love the music I make, and when I feel it, I can always makes something great. I may not have as many ideas as some of the community, and I certainly don’t have as much fame, but when it comes down to it the music is what matters to me. I am not making music for the hell of it. I am making music to share with the world. Just to have one person find my music randomly and tell me they really enjoy it can make my whole week.

Yes, I want to write music for a video game, and one day I will. I know that because no matter how bogged down I get, I won’t stop trying and I won’t lose sight of what I truly want. Because you can’t beat the final boss if you don’t even enter the last dungeon.